doc/managment.rst, before:

.. highlight:: text

.. _adv_managment:

Advanced managment
==================

`py-qgis-server2` come with managment tools for Qgis service clusters.

It allows you to:

* Retrieve infos about running Qgis clusters
* Synchronize cache between instances of the same Qgis pools
* Manage cache for each instances.
* Get plugin's infos
* List project's catalog
* Watch health status 
* Serve REST managment api  


Running managment from CLI
--------------------------

You may run the managment tool from CLI::

    > pip install py-qgis-admin
    > python3 -m py_qgis_admin --help
    Usage: python -m py_qgis_admin [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS]...

    Options:
      --help  Show this message and exit.

    Commands:
      cache    Cache management
      catalog  Print catalog for 'host'
      conf     Configuration management
      doc      Manage documentation
      plugins  List backend's loaded plugins
      pools    List all pools
      serve    Run admin server
      stats    Output qgis gRPC services stats
      watch    Watch a cluster of qgis gRPC services


or from the docker image::

    docker run -it --rm  -v <path/to/configfile>:/etc/qgis-server-admin.toml \
        -e PY_QGIS_SERVER_ADMIN_CONFIGFILE=/etc/qgis-server-admin.toml \
        3liz/qgis-services:ltr qgis-server-admin


Managment from REST api
------------------------

Managment may also be handler using REST api with the `serve` command::

    > qgis-server-admin serve

From this you can use your own dashboard for managing your Qgis clusters.


Api specification
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Check the full :download:`openapi specification <specs/openapi-managment.json>`.

You may use the redoc tool to visualize it::

    docker run --rm -p 8080:80 \
      -v $(pwd)/doc/specs/openapi-managment.json:/usr/share/nginx/html/openapi.json \
      -e SPEC_URL=openapi.json redocly/redoc


Configuration
-------------

Configuration is read from toml file.

The configuration define Qgis backend's pool with `resolvers` that describe
how to access the pools - actually only DNS résolution and unix socket are
supported.

The following example define the `qgis-rpc` host as a DNS endpoint for a cluster
of qgis services pool.
    
.. code-block:: toml

    [resolvers]

    [[resolvers.pools]]
    label = "basic"
    type = "dns"
    host = "qgis-rpc"
    port = 23456

If you are using the :ref:`basic docker-compose example <docker_compose_setup>` and your
running admin container is attached to the compose network stack, then your configuration
will point to the `qgis-rpc` services.

Examples::

    > qgis-server-admin pools
    Pool  1. basic           qgis-rpc:23456    backends: 3
    * 172.25.0.5:23456
    * 172.25.0.2:23456
    * 172.25.0.6:23456

    > qgis-server-admin stats --host qgis-rpc
    [
        {
            "address": "172.25.0.2:23456",
            "numWorkers": 1,
            "requestPressure": 0.0,
            "status": "ok",
            "stoppedWorkers": 0,
            "uptime": 6217,
            "workerFailurePressure": 0.0
        },
        {
            "address": "172.25.0.5:23456",
            "numWorkers": 1,
            "requestPressure": 0.0,
            "status": "ok",
            "stoppedWorkers": 0,
            "uptime": 132,
            "workerFailurePressure": 0.0
        },
        {
            "address": "172.25.0.6:23456",
            "numWorkers": 1,
            "requestPressure": 0.0,
            "status": "ok",
            "stoppedWorkers": 0,
            "uptime": 131,
            "workerFailurePressure": 0.0
        }
    ]


.. _admin_sync_with_backends:

Synchronizing with backends
---------------------------


.. _admin_cache_sync:

Cache synchronization
---------------------

In pool of Qgis services, cache may be desynchronized for different reasons:

* Scaling up the pool
* Using the `load_project_on_request`
* Updating container in a orchestrated environment


.. _admin_configuration_schema:

Configuration schema
--------------------

When reading configuration from file, the format is TOML
by default. 

The configuration schema may be output as different format using the `doc` command
from the CLI: the `json` or `yaml` format may be used for validation. 


.. _admin_configuration_toml:

TOML configuration schema
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. literalinclude:: configs/managment.toml
     :language: toml

Commit message:

Clean up removed pools from admin service

doc/managment.rst, after:

.. highlight:: text

.. _adv_managment:

Advanced managment
==================

`py-qgis-server2` come with managment tools for Qgis service clusters.

It allows you to:

* Retrieve infos about running Qgis clusters
* Synchronize cache between instances of the same Qgis pools
* Manage cache for each instances.
* Get plugin's infos
* List project's catalog
* Watch health status 
* Serve REST managment api  


Running managment from CLI
--------------------------

You may run the managment tool from CLI::

    > pip install py-qgis-admin
    > python3 -m py_qgis_admin --help
    Usage: python -m py_qgis_admin [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS]...

    Options:
      --help  Show this message and exit.

    Commands:
      cache    Cache management
      catalog  Print catalog for 'host'
      conf     Configuration management
      doc      Manage documentation
      plugins  List backend's loaded plugins
      pools    List all pools
      serve    Run admin server
      stats    Output qgis gRPC services stats
      watch    Watch a cluster of qgis gRPC services


or from the docker image::

    docker run -it --rm  -v <path/to/configfile>:/etc/qgis-server-admin.toml \
        -e PY_QGIS_SERVER_ADMIN_CONFIGFILE=/etc/qgis-server-admin.toml \
        3liz/qgis-services:ltr qgis-server-admin


Managment from REST api
------------------------

Managment may also be handler using REST api with the `serve` command::

    > qgis-server-admin serve

From this you can use your own dashboard for managing your Qgis clusters.


Api specification
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Check the full :download:`openapi specification <specs/openapi-managment.json>`.

You may use the redoc tool to visualize it::

    docker run --rm -p 8080:80 \
      -v $(pwd)/doc/specs/openapi-managment.json:/usr/share/nginx/html/openapi.json \
      -e SPEC_URL=openapi.json redocly/redoc


Configuration
-------------

Configuration is read from toml file.

The configuration define Qgis backend's pool with `resolvers` that describe
how to access the pools - actually only DNS résolution and unix socket are
supported.

The following example define the `qgis-rpc` host as a DNS endpoint for a cluster
of qgis services pool.
    
.. code-block:: toml

    [resolvers]

    [[resolvers.pools]]
    label = "basic"
    type = "dns"
    host = "qgis-rpc"
    port = 23456

If you are using the :ref:`basic docker-compose example <docker_compose_setup>` and your
running admin container is attached to the compose network stack, then your configuration
will point to the `qgis-rpc` services.

Examples::

    > qgis-server-admin pools
    Pool  1. basic           qgis-rpc:23456    backends: 3
    * 172.25.0.5:23456
    * 172.25.0.2:23456
    * 172.25.0.6:23456

    > qgis-server-admin stats --host qgis-rpc
    [
        {
            "address": "172.25.0.2:23456",
            "numWorkers": 1,
            "requestPressure": 0.0,
            "status": "ok",
            "stoppedWorkers": 0,
            "uptime": 6217,
            "workerFailurePressure": 0.0
        },
        {
            "address": "172.25.0.5:23456",
            "numWorkers": 1,
            "requestPressure": 0.0,
            "status": "ok",
            "stoppedWorkers": 0,
            "uptime": 132,
            "workerFailurePressure": 0.0
        },
        {
            "address": "172.25.0.6:23456",
            "numWorkers": 1,
            "requestPressure": 0.0,
            "status": "ok",
            "stoppedWorkers": 0,
            "uptime": 131,
            "workerFailurePressure": 0.0
        }
    ]


.. _admin_sync_with_backends:

Synchronizing with backends
---------------------------

When adding new services, the backends configuration need to be updated


.. _admin_cache_sync:

Cache synchronization
---------------------

In pool of Qgis services, cache may be desynchronized for different reasons:

* Scaling up the pool
* Using the `load_project_on_request`
* Updating container in a orchestrated environment

The :ref:`cache restoration mecanism <rpc_cache_restoration>` may prevent most
of desynchronization mecanism, it may be required to manually resync caches: 

The cli managment tool provide the `sync` command while the REST api provides the
http method:

.. http:patch:: /v1/pools/{Id}/cache

   Synchronize and update cache between all pool instances



.. _admin_configuration_schema:

Configuration schema
--------------------

When reading configuration from file, the format is TOML
by default. 

The configuration schema may be output as different format using the `doc` command
from the CLI: the `json` or `yaml` format may be used for validation. 


.. _admin_configuration_toml:

TOML configuration schema
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. literalinclude:: configs/managment.toml
     :language: toml
